Hi and welcome back.
In this video we're going
to look at creating our first binary tree class.
Let's begin by creating a new project
that I've created here in my desktop
and then right click, and of course,
I'm creating a new Python file.
We're gonna call this app.py.
And I'm also going to create a couple other files
which I'm gonna call node.py,
and another one which I'm gonna call binary.tree.py.
Okay.
So we have three files: app, node, and binary tree.
I'm gonna keep them open up here
and I'm going to hide the side bar just
so we have a little bit more space.
And we're going to begin.
Our binary tree is going to have a starting point
which is going to be a node,
and then we're going to be able to add new nodes to it.
The first thing to do is to create our node class.
Our node class is just going to be a simple object
that has a value, a left, and a right node.
So we're gonna say class node
and it's gonna have an init method, a value,
and it's gonna have self.value = value,
self.left = none, self.right = none.
Okay.
So when we create a new node, it's just gonna start
as nothing, no children essentially.
Nothing on the left, nothing on the right.
And the value's gonna be whatever it is
that we pass to the init method.
Here I'm also going to add a short repr method just
because we're gonna be printing things out
and it may be handy to be able to get a nice representation
of the value of the node.
So this is the repr method, when we print it out we're
gonna see node five, for example.
Let's just verify this is all working
by writing a short script here in app.py.
We're gonna say from node, import node,
and then we're gonna create a new node,
then I'm gonna have the value five.
And then I'm gonna create a new node
that is gonna have the value nine,
and I'm gonna create a new node
that is gonna have the value 13.
I'm gonna assign these two variables:
left equal that, head equal that, and right equal that.
And now we're gonna do something
like head.left = left node, head.right = the right node,
and we should be able to do things like print the head,
print the head left, print the head right.
Pretty simple script.
Nothing really is going on except we've created our first,
sort of, binary tree here.
We've got our head node, and then we're setting the left
and right nodes so we're ending up with some sort
of triangular tree there.
If we run app.py we see node nine,
node five, node 13 printed out.
If you're interested, you know
that this is a pre-order traversal of the tree,
even though we've not really traversed anything yet.
We've just printed a few of the nodes out.
But the first thing we've printed is the head node,
then we've gone left and printed that node,
and then we've gone right and printed that node.
So this is an example of a pre-order simple traversal.
Okay, we've got this, now we're gonna delete
that and start working on our binary tree class.
In this video we're only going to work on adding a new node.
We're gonna implement what we've already see in the lecture
and then we're gonna add a few more videos
to talk about finding nodes and doing the traversal.
So we're gonna say from node import node,
and this is gonna be handy in just a moment.
And then we're gonna create our binary tree class,
it's gonna have an init method,
and that is going to require this starting point,
and it's gonna be self.head, self, head = head.
So this is gonna be the, sort of,
root of the binary tree, the head.
You'll see it called a root and you'll see it called a head,
either is fine.
Then we're gonna work on our add method,
which is taking a new node which is also going to be a node.
Notice how I'm adding type hinting here,
just so that Python can tell us
that a node has a value and so forth.
And then, once again, we're going to start at the very top
of the tree, so we're gonna say current node is self.head.
Now the current node is pointing
to the very top of our tree.
We now want to move through the tree,
until we either add a new node
or we reach the bottom of the tree.
So, while current node, we're gonna say,
if the new node value is equal
to the current node value, we've got a problem
because that means we're trying to add a node
that already exists in our tree.
We've sort of gone through our tree somehow,
and we've ended up with two nodes that are equal.
So here we're gonna raise a value error.
I'm gonna say a node with that value already exists.
Now we're gonna work on our elif.
If the new node value is less than the current node value,
if the new node value is less than the current node value,
then we are going to go left.
So we're gonna say if current node.left.
That means there is a node to the left.
We'll say current node = current node.left.
Simple enough.
If there is a node to the left
of where we currently are, that means
that we still have more travelling
to do in order to get there.
If there is no node, that means that the new node we want
to add belongs in it's place.
So we're gonna say current node.left = new node.
And of course we then break out of the loop
so we don't continue iterating over infinitely, essentially.
And then we're gonna add an elif if the new node.value
is greater than the current node value.
We do the same.
If current node.right, that means there is a node
to the right, we wanna go to it.
So we're gonna say current node = current node right.
Otherwise, we want to put a new node at the right
so we're gonna say current node right = new node.
And we will break again.
Hopefully this makes sense.
We've looked at in the lecture
which is why I'm going quite quickly through it.
But essentially all that happens is we have a node,
which is at the top of the tree,
and then we start iterating this loop.
At each point, if we encounter that we're adding a node
that is already there, we'll exit.
Otherwise, if the new node is less than the current node,
and this block sort of deals with going left.
Otherwise, if the new node is greater than the current node,
this code here deals with going right.
The left code says, if there is a node there,
move there, otherwise, add it.
And the right code does the same thing.
If there is a node to the right,
move there, otherwise, add it.
Notice that the nodes themselves don't change
as you go through this.
All you're doing is adding a sort of property here,
that makes it equal to the new node.
So what's happening in the background is the right property
becomes the same object that new node is.
It's a reference to the same place in memory.
We've looked at mutability before.
This current node.right is going to be the same entity,
the same thing in memory that new node is.
So as you run this multiple times, the current node right
and left, ends up constructing this tree.
You don't lose the value of new node when you reach the end
of the method because that value is now pointed at
by the property in each node.
And of course, the starting point of this chain
of properties is the head.
If you lose the head, the entire tree just sort
of disappears because you've got nothing that allows you
to reach any of the nodes.
What I mean is, the head points to other nodes.
If you somehow lose your reference to the head,
you have nothing pointing to the other nodes,
you don't have a way of accessing them
because there's nowhere in this code
that the children are stored.
The children are only stored as references in the head.
So, nonetheless, just an interesting thing there.
Make sure to not set the head to none
or anything like that cause then you're gonna sort
of lose your entire tree.
Now that we have this tree here,
we could write in our app a short script to add nodes,
but we don't really have a way of retrieving nodes.
We don't have a way of printing the tree out.
So there's not much that we can do there.
But let's do it anyway.
We'll do from binary tree import, binary tree.
And we're gonna say tree is a new binary tree
and the head is a new node,
which is gonna have the value nine.
Then we're gonna say tree.add a new node with value five.
And tree.add a new node with value 11.
What do you think's gonna happen
when we print tree.head, tree.head.left,
and tree.head.right?
Which node is going to be the head,
which node is going to be the left,
which node is going to be the right?
Let's try it out.
Notice how the head is nine, five is at the left,
and 11 is at the right so our code
has automatically placed the nodes where they belong,
because five was added after nine and you sort of went
through this and found out that five was indeed less
than nine, so we placed it at the left.
Okay.
In the next video, we're going to look at
how we can print out the tree in order,
so I'll see you there.